=== PAGE 1 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
Available online 30 July 2024
0009-2509/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Contentslistsavailableat ScienceDirect
Chemical Engineering Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ces
Hybrid modeling for improved extrapolation and transfer learning in the 
chemical processing industry
JoelSansana a, RicardoRendall b, IvanCastillo b, LeoChiang b, MarcoS.Reis a,∗
a University of Coimbra, CERES, Department of Chemical Engineering, 3030-790 Coimbra, Portugal
b The Dow Chemical Company, United States of America
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Hybrid modeling
Transfer learning
Machine learning
Extrapolation
Multimode processes
In the Chemical Processing Industry, shifts in market demand often require the implementation of new operational 
modes that balance economic advantages with the need to meet quality and sustainability targets. Hybrid 
modeling can support these process changes by combining physics-based and data-driven modeling principles 
to improve prediction accuracy and interpretation. In this work, the use of hybrid modeling for improved 
extrapolation and transfer learning activities is examined in the context of simulated biodiesel production. We 
study and compare diﬀerent conﬁgurations of hybrid modeling, including the parallel and serial structures. We 
also compare hybrid modeling approaches with physics-based and data-driven models, and ﬁnd that hybrid 
modeling consistently outperforms these benchmarks in both extrapolation and transfer learning tasks. Hybrid 
modeling also requires fewer samples than other benchmarks for the transfer learning task. These results suggest 
that hybrid modeling is an eﬀective approach for supporting decision-making and optimizing process changes in 
the CPI.
1. Introduction
Chemical Processing Industry (CPI) face a number of challenges in 
adapting to changing market conditions and demands, when the need 
to ﬂexibly and rapidly respond to new scenarios is imperative (Kim et 
al., 2023; Reis and Gins, 2017). Such changing external conditions often 
result in the implementation of new operational modes that are econom-
ically viable while still meeting quality and sustainability targets (Liew 
et al., 2014). Examples include the need to produce a new product grade 
or to signiﬁcantly shift the operation window due to changes in energy, 
raw material and utility costs (Molinaro and Orzes, 2022; Tomba et al., 
2012). In this context, data analytical technologies, such as hybrid mod-
eling, can provide solutions to support and speed up process changes in 
the CPI. Hybrid modeling has gained signiﬁcant attention in recent years 
due to the increasing availability of data and the development of new an-
alytics methodologies. By combining multiple modeling principles and 
techniques, and taking the most out of all available sources of knowledge 
in chemical systems (ﬁrst-principles knowledge, heuristic knowledge, 
and knowledge derived from process data, (Oliveira, 1998; Schubert 
et al., 1994)), hybrid modeling frameworks can enable a more com-
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address:marco@eq.uc.pt(M.S.Reis).
URL:https://www.eq.uc.pt/~marco/(M.S.Reis).
prehensive understanding of the process and how it is likely to change 
over time, enabling better decision-making and proactive management 
of process operations (de Calle-Etxabe et al., 2020; von Stosch et al., 
2014).
Hybrid modeling oﬀers certain advantages over pure physics-based 
or data-driven approaches. Physics-based models are typically more dif-
ﬁcult to develop and require a signiﬁcant amount of prior knowledge, 
but are interpretable, often more accurate and have better extrapola-
tion capabilities. Data-driven models, on the other hand, are faster to 
develop and more ﬂexible, but constrained to the speciﬁc data domain 
in which they are trained and less interpretable (Sansana et al., 2021). 
The concept of integrating mechanistic and data-driven modeling prin-
ciples was initially introduced in 1992, whereby equations expressing 
mass and energy balances were combined with neural networks or ra-
dial basis functions (Johansen and Foss, 1992; Kramer et al., 1992; 
Psichogios and Ungar, 1992; Su et al., 1992). First-principles models 
and data-driven models can be combined under various hybrid struc-
tures, including serial and parallel structures, which will be discussed 
in greater detail later. The main objective of these architectures is to as-
semble all available knowledge about a system and create synergies that 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2024.120568
Received 26 March 2024; Received in revised form 23 July 2024; Accepted 24 July 2024
=== PAGE 2 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
2
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 1. Implementationofnewoperatingconditions.
lead to improved prediction accuracy and/or stability in the ﬁnal model 
(Oliveira, 2004; Zhuang et al., 2022).
Managing process changes in the CPI often involves moving the pro-
cess from its current operating region (region A) to a new region (region 
B), as shown in Fig. 1 (Farahani et al., 2021; Quiñones-Grueiro et al., 
2019). This process can be conceptually divided into three stages. In the 
ﬁrst stage, models developed in region A are directly extrapolated to re-
gion B. The accuracy of this extrapolation is important in order to obtain 
reliable estimates of the quality metric(s) of interest in region B. In the 
second stage, as the process continues to operate in region B and more 
data is collected, model retraining can be performed to account for any 
mismatches between the model and the actual process behavior in re-
gion B. Finally, in the third stage, a large volume of data on region B 
has been collected, allowing for more robust modeling and analysis.
The second stage, where data available in region B are still scarce, 
is particularly challenging, and methodologies that can eﬃciently uti-
lize prior knowledge and the limited amount of data are preferred. One 
approach that has proven useful in these situations is transfer learning 
(Pan and Yang, 2010), which allows for the leveraging of information 
obtained in region A to improve the performance of models in region B. 
Transfer learning can be particularly useful when the underlying process 
dynamics are similar in both regions A and B, allowing for the transfer 
of knowledge and experience gained in one region to the other (Facco 
et al., 2012).
In this work, we investigate the use of hybrid modeling for sup-
porting extrapolation and transfer learning in the context of managing 
process changes in CPI. We study diﬀerent conﬁgurations of hybrid mod-
eling, including parallel and series conﬁgurations, and compare them 
to benchmarks that include pure physics-based models and data-driven 
models. The physics-based model used in this study is based on sim-
pliﬁed reaction kinetics, while the data-driven methods include partial 
least squares (PLS) (Wold et al., 2001), least absolute shrinkage and 
selection operator (LASSO) (Hastie et al., 2016), random forest (RF) 
(Dietterich, 2000), and neural networks (NN) (Bishop, 2006), to pro-
vide reasonable coverage of the data analytics spectrum.
The primary objective of this paper is to demonstrate how hybrid 
modeling can serve as a valuable tool for industry practitioners to in-
tegrate knowledge and data to address evolving process conditions and 
changing market demands. We argue that the utilization of this tech-
nology is still limited due to the scarcity of well-deﬁned guidelines and 
a perceived steep learning curve for training hybrid models. Through-
out the paper, we aim to clarify the advantages of combining “classic” 
ﬁrst-principles models with machine learning methods. Furthermore, we 
elaborate on the application of hybrid modeling in the frame of transfer 
learning, illustrating the process of updating an existing hybrid model 
with new data.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 in-
troduces several machine learning methods, and revises ﬁrst-principles 
modeling and hybrid modeling architectures. In Section3, a simulated 
case study from a biodiesel production process is described, as well as 
the data generation approach followed. This case study was designed to 
provide a realistic and challenging scenario for testing the proposed hy-
brid methodologies under new operating conditions. Section4presents 
the results and a discussion of the extrapolation and transfer learning 
capabilities of the methodologies under analysis. Finally, Section5sum-
marizes the conclusions of this work and oﬀers some perspectives for 
future work.
2. Methods
This section presents the analytical methodologies utilized in this 
study. Firstly, we discuss the data-driven modeling approaches em-
ployed, such as LASSO, PLS, RF, and NN. Next, we present the ﬁrst-
principles model used in this study. Finally, we discuss hybrid model 
architectures, that combine data-driven and ﬁrst-principles models.
2.1. Data-driven modeling methodologies
The increasing availability of data in the 21st century, attributed 
to the continuous development of faster and more informative sen-
sors, larger and distributed storage resources, and greater computational 
power, has prompted engineers to further consider data as a valuable 
source of information (Kourti and MacGregor, 1995; Kresta et al., 1991; 
MacGregor and Kourti, 1995; MacGregor et al., 1994; Reis and Saraiva, 
2019). Data science has emerged as a ﬁeld of knowledge that encom-
passes statistics, mathematics, and computer science to address the chal-
lenges associated with the data-intensive environment usually known as 
big data. Research on this topic within the context of Process Systems 
Engineering (PSE) has spurred the development of techniques to address 
various data-related issues, including high-dimensionality, collinearity, 
sparsity, nonlinearity, non-stationarity, the presence of noise, outliers, 
and missing data, among others (Rendall and Reis, 2018). In the follow-
ing, we describe some of the most commonly used data-driven models 
within the context of hybrid modeling approaches.
In brief terms, LASSO is a regularization technique that has em-
bedded a variable selection capability by shrinking the less important 
parameters to zero. PLS is a multivariate regression technique that can 
handle data with high colinearity by projecting the input dimensions to a 
low-dimensional predictive subspace of latent variables. Random forest 
=== PAGE 3 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
3
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 2. The“data-drivenmodelingdiamond”consideredinthiswork.
regression is a nonlinear method based on the use of multiple decision 
trees built up from slightly perturbed subsets of training data, to gener-
ate an ensemble predictor of the target response by averaging over all 
individual predictions. NNs are a type of machine learning model that is 
inspired by the structure and function of the human brain and is capable 
of learning complex non-linear patterns from data. These four machine 
learning methods form what we call the Data-driven Diamond, as shown 
in Fig.2, serving as a representation of four types of regression modeling 
methods: latent variable, ensemble, regularized, and neural networks.
2.1.1. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator
The LASSO is a regularized modeling technique that is used to es-
timate sparse coeﬃcients (Hastie et al., 2016). This methodology is 
particularly useful for datasets with high collinearity and some degree 
of sparsity regarding variables’ importance for prediction, both of which 
are frequently encountered in the ﬁeld of CPI. Due to its ability to gen-
erate solutions with fewer non-zero coeﬃcients, the LASSO is also used 
as a feature selection methodology (Rendall et al., 2019). In general, 
LASSO provides an estimate for the parameter vector, 𝜷, of a multiple 
regression model represented by the equation:
𝐘= 𝐗 ⋅ 𝜷 + 𝐄 (1)
where 𝐗 is the input variables extended matrix (extended, because it 
contains a column of ones to account for the intercept term) or fea-
ture matrix, and 𝐄 is the residuals matrix. Regularization techniques 
are widely used in machine learning to stabilize the estimation tasks. By 
imposing constraints on the magnitudes of the model coeﬃcients, they 
stabilize the predictions, reducing their variance at the expense of in-
troducing some bias. LASSO is a well-known regularization method that 
incorporates an L1-norm penalty into the least squares regression prob-
lem in order to decrease the magnitudes of the regression coeﬃcients 
(Tibshirani, 1996). The LASSO solution can be obtained by minimizing 
the objective function:
̂𝛽𝐋𝐀𝐒𝐒𝐎 = min
̂𝛽=[ ̂𝛽0,..., ̂𝛽𝑝]𝑇
𝑁∑
𝑖=1
(𝑦𝑖 − ̂𝑦𝑖)+ 𝜆
𝑝∑
𝑗=1
| ̂𝛽𝑗 | (2)
where 𝑦𝑖 denotes the 𝑖𝑡ℎ observed response, ̂𝑦𝑖 represents the corre-
sponding model prediction, and 𝜆 is the hyperparameter that controls 
the degree of regularization.
2.1.2. Partial least squares
Latent variable methods form a class of modeling approaches that are 
employed to circumvent challenges associated with high-dimensional, 
correlated predictors. These techniques operate on the premise that 
there exists a set of unmeasured variables that drive the variability of 
the observed ones (Rendall and Reis, 2018). PLS regression establishes 
a correlation between two sets of data, denoted as 𝐗and 𝐘, by identify-
ing linear combinations of predictors that exhibit maximum covariance 
with the linear combinations of the responses. The relationship between 
the two sets can be described by the following equations (Wold et al., 
2001):
𝐗= 𝐓 ⋅ 𝐏T + 𝐄 (3)
𝐘= 𝐓 ⋅ 𝐐T + 𝐅 (4)
where 𝐓 represents the matrix of latent variables, 𝐏 represents the X-
loadings matrix, 𝐐represents the Y-loadings matrix, and 𝐄and 𝐅rep-
resent the residual matrices for 𝐗 and 𝐘 blocks, respectively (Geladi, 
1988).
Once the parameters are estimated, the model formed by eqs. (3)
and (4) can be recast into a linear regression format, of the type of 
eq. (1). Although there are various algorithms for estimating a PLS 
model (Andersson, 2009; de Jong, 1993; Wold, 1975), in this study, 
we have used the NIPALS algorithm, implemented in scikit-learn (Pe-
dregosa et al., 2011).
2.1.3. Random forest
Regression trees model the relationship between predictors and a 
response variable by means of a piece-wise constant function. Such a 
model can predict the value of a target variable by learning simple de-
cision rules from the data features. However, trees tend to have high 
variance, as small changes in the training set often lead to new trees 
with diﬀerent split points and splitting variables. To address these is-
sues, an ensemble of trees is commonly employed to improve prediction 
performance and decrease prediction variance (Hastie et al., 2016).
RF regression is an algorithm that employs the bootstrap method to 
generate new datasets, which are used to build multiple regression trees. 
Prediction for a given sample is obtained by averaging the predictions 
of all trees in the ensemble (Dietterich, 2000):
̂𝑦𝑖 = 1
𝑁𝑡
𝑁𝑡∑
𝑛=1
𝑓𝑛(𝑥𝑖) (5)
where 𝑁𝑡 is the number of trees in the ensemble and 𝑓𝑛(𝑥𝑖)is the pre-
diction from the 𝑛th regression tree for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ observation. Additionally, 
each tree in RF only considers a randomly selected subset of predictors. 
The advantage of this method is that the trees in the ensemble are less 
correlated, leading to increased prediction performance (Rendall et al., 
2019).
2.1.4. Neural networks
Neural Networks (NN) are commonly used due to their ability to ﬂex-
ibly model nonlinearities and their independence from prior knowledge 
about the system being modeled (Oliveira, 2004; Psichogios and Un-
gar, 1992; Thompson and Kramer, 1994). NNs are composed of a set of 
interconnected processing units, referred to as neurons, that exchange 
information between them. There are diﬀerent types of neural net-
works, but the most popular for hybrid modeling is the fully-connected 
feed-forward multilayer perceptron (MLP). Each neuron computes the 
weighted sum of all incoming signals (𝑆𝑗) from the previous layer, plus 
a bias term. The 𝑆𝑗 values are called activations and are linear combina-
tions of the input variables (Bishop, 2006). An output is then generated 
through an activation function, 𝑓(.), as follows,
̂𝑦(𝑚)
𝑘 = 𝑓
( 𝑛∑
𝑖=1
𝜔𝑖,𝑗𝑋𝑖 + 𝜃𝑗
)
(6)
where 𝜔𝑖,𝑗 are the weights for neuron 𝑖in layer 𝑗, 𝑋𝑖 are the inputs to 
neuron 𝑖and 𝜃𝑗 is the bias term. There are several activation functions 
commonly used in neural networks. In this work, we used the rectiﬁed 
linear unit (ReLU) activation function (Maas et al., 2013). For parameter 
estimation, the Adam optimizer was employed with the goal of minimiz-
ing the root mean squared error (MSE) between the training data and 
model predictions (Kingma and Ba, 2017). The scikit-learn implementa-
tion of MLP was adopted (Pedregosa et al., 2011). Although most NNs 
used in hybrid modeling consist of three layers, it is also possible to em-
ploy more layers using deep learning techniques and stochastic gradient 
descent for the learning process (Schmidhuber, 2015).
=== PAGE 4 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
4
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 3. The“ﬁrst-principlesmodelingdiamond”consideredinthiswork.
2.2. First-principles modeling methodologies
The construction of a ﬁrst-principles model for hybrid modeling 
frameworks depends on the available prior knowledge. This approach 
involves solving the underlying equations governing the system’s be-
havior, which may enable a more accurate prediction of the system 
response. Usually, this knowledge is in the form of balances for ex-
tensive system properties, such as mass and energy (Azarpour et al., 
2017; Oliveira, 2004; Psichogios and Ungar, 1992) or physical con-
straints (Gurden et al., 2001; Su et al., 1992; Thompson and Kramer, 
1994). These mathematical statements can be expressed more simply 
as algebraic equations or, with increasing complexity, as ordinary dif-
ferential equations (ODEs) (for lumped parameter system modeling), 
diﬀerential algebraic equations (DAEs) or PDEs (for distributed param-
eter system modeling) (von Rueden et al., 2023), as presented in Fig.3. 
By increasing the complexity of the mechanistic model, one reduces the 
structural mismatch between the model and the chemical process, but 
the larger number of parameters can lead to more uncertain estimates 
if there is no accurate information for the parameters (this is the bias-
variance trade-oﬀ for mechanistic models). The ﬁrst-principles models 
adopted in this study involve mass and energy balances, and establish a 
connection between input and output variables. To assess the eﬀective-
ness of the hybrid modeling approach, a lumped parameter model was 
employed as a benchmark or sub-model.
2.3. Hybrid modeling architectures
In the mainstream hybrid modeling literature, the prevalent way to 
combine the two modeling approaches (ﬁrst-principles and data-driven) 
is based on the analysis of the structure of the ﬁrst-principles model and 
its assumptions. A parallel cooperative architecture is adopted when 
there is a need to compensate for a clear mechanistic structural mis-
match. On the other hand, if the mechanistic structure is accurate 
enough, then a serial architecture is usually the preferred choice (von 
Stosch et al., 2014).
This study aims to compare the performance of the various hybrid 
model architectures shown in Fig.4, including the parallel cooperative 
and serial architectures. Additionally, we include a new fusion-inspired 
parallel competitive architecture and a reverse serial architecture, which 
we refer to as knowledge augmented hybrid modeldue to the use of a data 
augmentation technique. The purpose of this comparison is to determine 
which architecture is most suitable for a given, a priori deﬁned task, and 
to identify potential areas for further improvement.
In the CPI, variables are generally continuous, thereby making re-
gression the predominant modeling approach. In the context of hybrid 
modeling, this assumption remains valid. Our objective is therefore to 
learn a function 𝑓𝐻 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ that maps an input with 𝐷 features, 
𝑥 ∈ ℝ𝐷, to a target observation 𝑦 ∈ ℝ. To accomplish this, a set of pa-
rameters 𝜽, upon which 𝑓𝐻 depends, must be learned (the function 𝑓𝐻
can be represented as 𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜃), to make the parameter set explicit).
Fig. 4. The“hybridmodelsdiamond”consideredinthiswork.
Fig. 5.Schematic representation of the parallel cooperative structure for hybrid 
modeling.
2.3.1. Parallel cooperative
The parallel cooperative architecture assumes that the function 
𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)can be expressed as a summation of a ﬁrst-principles function 
𝑓𝑝 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ and a data-driven model 𝑓𝑑 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ, 𝑓𝑝 ≠ 𝑓𝑑, as fol-
lows:
𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)= 𝑓𝑝(𝑥; 𝝁)+ 𝑓𝑑(𝑥; 𝝍) (7)
where 𝝁represents the parameter set of the ﬁrst-principles model (𝑓𝑝) 
and 𝝍 represents the parameter set of the data-driven model (𝑓𝑑); 𝜽
is the reunion of these two sets, 𝜽={ 𝝁, 𝝍}. The hybrid model can be 
trained separately by ﬁrst identifying 𝝁with respect to the output vari-
able. Subsequently, once 𝑓𝑝 is known, the residuals can be computed by 
using the predictions of the ﬁrst-principles model, expressed as follows:
𝑟𝑖 = 𝑦𝑖 − 𝑓𝑝(𝑥; 𝝁) (8)
Finally, the parameters of the data-driven approach 𝝍 can be ﬁtted 
to the residual dataset (𝑥𝑖, 𝑟𝑖)𝑁
𝑖=1. In summary, the hybrid model operates 
by improving the ﬁrst-principles model through the use of a data-driven 
model that explains part of the structure still present in the residuals, as 
depicted in Fig.5. The model predictions are obtained by the following 
expression:
̂𝑦𝐻,𝑖 = ̂𝑦𝑝,𝑖 + 𝑟𝑖 (9)
where ̂𝑦𝐻,𝑖 represents the output of the hybrid model, ̂𝑦𝑝,𝑖 represents 
the output of the ﬁrst-principles model, and 𝑟𝑖 represents the residuals 
computed by the data-driven model.
2.3.2. Parallel competitive
In the parallel competitive architecture, the function 𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽) can 
be expressed as a weighted average of a function derived from ﬁrst-
principles 𝑓𝑝 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ, and another obtained by induction from data 
𝑓𝑑 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ, 𝑓𝑝 ≠ 𝑓𝑑. The equation describing this architecture can be 
presented as follows:
𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)= 𝛼𝑓𝑝(𝑥; 𝝁)+(1− 𝛼)𝑓𝑑(𝑥; 𝝍) (10)
=== PAGE 5 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
5
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 6.Schematic representation of the parallel competitive structure for hybrid 
modeling.
Fig. 7. Schematicrepresentationoftheserialstructureforhybridmodeling.
The weighting factor, 𝛼, which determines the relative importance of 
each model, is an element of the parameter set 𝜽, i.e., 𝜽={ 𝛼, 𝝁, 𝝍}. In 
this architecture, both models are trained independently with respect to 
the target variable 𝑦. Subsequently, the weighting factor 𝛼 is tuned by 
least-squares minimization. The ﬁnal model prediction, shown in Fig.6, 
has the following form:
̂𝑦𝐻,𝑖 = 𝛼̂𝑦𝑝,𝑖 +(1− 𝛼) ̂𝑦𝑑,𝑖 (11)
where ̂𝑦𝐻,𝑖 represents the output of the hybrid model, ̂𝑦𝑝,𝑖 represents 
the output of the ﬁrst-principles model, and ̂𝑦𝑑,𝑖 represents the output 
of the data-driven model.
2.3.3. Serial hybrid
The serial hybrid architecture assumes that the function 𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)is 
deﬁned by a ﬁrst-principles model, denoted by 𝑓𝑝 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ, where 
some or all of its parameters are speciﬁed by a data-driven model, rep-
resented by 𝑓𝑑 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ𝑃, where 𝑃 is the number of parameters to be 
estimated by 𝑓𝑑 and inserted in 𝑓𝑝. The equation governing this archi-
tecture can be expressed as follows:
𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)= 𝑓𝑝(𝑥;𝑓𝑑(𝑥; 𝝍), 𝝁), (12)
where 𝑓𝑑(𝑥; 𝝍)denotes the parameters of the ﬁrst-principles model (𝑓𝑝) 
that are learned by 𝑓𝑑, while 𝝁 represents the remaining parameters 
of the ﬁrst-principles model. The hybrid model can be trained concur-
rently, with the objective of identifying both 𝝁and 𝝍with respect to the 
output variable, denoted by 𝑦. This training approach may pose some 
numerical challenges if the ﬁrst-principles model 𝑓𝑝 is complex.
Alternatively, we will adopt a sequential identiﬁcation route, which 
we refer to as the explicit serial hybrid approach. In this training 
methodology, the ﬁrst-principles model 𝑓𝑝 is solved for 𝑓𝑑(𝑥; 𝝍)at each 
available measurements’ time, {𝑥𝑖}𝑖=1 𝑁, leading to {𝑓∗
𝑑(𝑥𝑖; 𝝍)}𝑁
𝑖=1. 
Subsequently, the parameters of the data-driven model, 𝝍, are ﬁtted to 
this extended dataset represented by {𝑥𝑖, 𝑓∗
𝑑(𝑥𝑖; 𝝍)}𝑁
𝑖=1. Once the data-
driven model 𝑓𝑑 is determined, it will provide the parameter estimates 
for the ﬁrst-principles model, which, in turn, produces the ﬁnal model 
prediction, as shown in Fig.7. The sequential identiﬁcation route com-
pels the practitioner to inspect the predictions of physics-based parame-
ters from the data-driven model, thereby rendering a more interpretable 
and transparent approach.
2.3.4. Knowledge augmented hybrid
We propose a new architecture, called knowledge augmented hy-
brid architecture, which involves augmenting a process dataset with 
physics-based knowledge. This data augmentation operation is achieved 
Fig. 8. Schematic representation of the knowledge augmented structure for hy-
brid modeling.
by concatenating the state predictions obtained from a ﬁrst-principles 
model to the existing data matrix. The approach assumes that the func-
tion 𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)can be deﬁned by a data-driven model, 𝑓𝑑 ∶ ℝ(𝐷+𝑆) → ℝ, 
where its 𝑆inputs are generated by a ﬁrst-principles model represented 
by 𝑓𝑝 ∶ ℝ𝐷 → ℝ𝑆. The architecture’s governing equations can be ex-
pressed as follows:
𝑓𝐻(𝑥; 𝜽)= 𝑓𝑑(̃𝑥; 𝝍), (13)
̃𝑥=[ 𝑥,𝑓𝑝(𝑥; 𝝁)], (14)
where, ̃𝑥 denotes the dataset of process measurements that are aug-
mented with ﬁrst-principles state predictions. In this architecture, both 
models are trained independently with respect to the target variable, 𝑦.
2.4. Hybrid modeling for transfer learning
In CPI, transfer learning can be eﬀectively employed to adapt or 
reﬁne models for expanding their use to new product grades or alter-
native regions of operation. Moreover, transfer learning can facilitate 
the application of models developed from data collected in pilot units 
to industrial-scale equipment, or alternatively transfer a model from one 
equipment, say A, to another similar equipment, B.
The current research investigates the use of hybrid modeling through 
transfer learning, a methodology we believe has not been extensively 
documented in existing chemical engineering literature. It is based on 
the assumption that although the underlying thermodynamics and phys-
ical laws governing a chemical process remain unchanged when oper-
ating conditions are altered, a model may not be able to fully capture 
them, being always a simpliﬁed version of reality. As George Box fa-
mously stated, “All models are wrong...”, and therefore, a model that 
performs well on a particular set of conditions, say A, may not con-
tinue to perform well on a diﬀerent scenario, say B. The discrepancy 
between the model and the actual process can usually be attributed to 
one of the following three reasons: 1) parametric mismatch, 2) struc-
tural mismatch, or 3) both parametric and structural mismatch (Chen 
and Ierapetritou, 2020).
The selection of a hybrid structure represents a critical decision when 
transferring a model, and this choice is strongly inﬂuenced by the ac-
curacy of the available model. If the model, regardless of whether it is 
ﬁrst-principles, data-driven, or hybrid, exhibits a high degree of struc-
tural dissimilarity with the real process, the parallel cooperative archi-
tecture (see Fig.5) is often preferred because the data-driven submodel 
learns the residuals to correct mismatch. However, the knowledge aug-
mented hybrid architecture (see Fig. 8) is also a viable approach for 
bridging the discrepancy. In contrast, the serial approach is ill-suited 
for model transfer in this conditions, as it requires the identiﬁcation of 
the subsystem where the knowledge gap exists or of the parameters that 
require updating (Sansana et al., 2021).
3. Case study
This section presents the case study, beginning with a description 
of the process simulator used and how data is generated to achieve the 
objectives of this study. We then present the ﬁrst-principles model that 
will play the role of benchmark method, and that will be also used in 
the construction of the hybrid models.
=== PAGE 6 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
6
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 9.Process ﬂow diagram of the biodiesel production process simulated in BDsim (adapted from Fernandes et al. (2019)). In the case study, we have only considered 
the reactor section.
3.1. Data generation
The software BDsim, an open-source simulator of an industrial con-
tinuous process for biodiesel production (Brásio et al., 2016; Fernandes 
et al., 2019), provides the testing scenarios in this study. In particular, 
we focus on the reaction section of the biodiesel production process, as 
illustrated in Fig.9. Data is generated using a 2-level full factorial design 
with two factors and two center points. The two factors that can be con-
trolled in BDsim’s reactor are the reactor temperature (𝑇𝑅) and the oil 
feed ﬂow (𝐹𝑜𝑖𝑙), which results in 4-month long experimental period for 
the training set plus a 2-month long experimental period for the center 
points, totaling 6 months of collected data. The center points represent 
the simulator’s original normal operating conditions, while the upper 
and lower bounds are obtained by perturbing the center points condi-
tions with ±5% deviations on both input variables, thereby enriching 
the information content of the dataset.
To evaluate the performance of the models, two test sets were gener-
ated: an in-domain test set (ID test) and an out-of-domain test set (OOD 
test), as depicted in Fig.10. The former comprises an additional month 
simulated with input variables at an intermediate level of +2.5% devi-
ation. The latter, generated from a 2-level full factorial design with two 
factors, includes only one middle point at the beginning and increased 
deviations of ±10%. We use the OOD test set to assess the extrapolation 
performance (stage I) and transfer learning capabilities (stage II).
The data points were sampled at an hourly rate, with seven vari-
ables being monitored: temperature of the reactor (𝑇𝑅), mass ﬂow-rate 
of oil feed (𝐹𝑜𝑖𝑙), pressure drop across the oil ﬁlter (Δ𝑃), mass ﬂow-
rate of methanol feed (𝐹𝑚), temperature of oil (𝑇𝑜𝑖𝑙), temperature of the 
methanol stream (𝑇𝑚), and the biodiesel molar fraction in the reactor 
output stream (𝑥𝑏𝑖𝑜, which is also the KPI).
3.2. First-principles model (benchmark)
The behavior of a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) can be 
modeled using a system of mass balance equations that describe the 
concentrations of the components of interest in the liquid phase. Under 
the assumption that the liquid phase is uniformly mixed, the mass bal-
ance equations can be formulated in the state space representation as 
follows:
𝑑𝐱
𝑑𝑡 =( 𝑁𝑚(𝐱𝐦 − 𝐱)+ 𝑁𝑜(𝐱𝐨 − 𝐱)+ 𝐫𝑉𝑅)∕𝑛𝑅 , (15)
Fig. 10. Represention of the operating conditions simulated for generating 
datasets.
where 𝐱, 𝐱𝐦, and 𝐱𝐨 denote the vectors of molar fractions of component 𝑖
in the reactor, methanol input stream, and oil input stream, respectively. 
The input methanol molar ﬂow and oil molar ﬂow are represented by 
𝑁𝑚 and 𝑁𝑜, respectively. The reaction rate of component 𝑖 is denoted 
by the vector 𝐫, 𝑉𝑅 represents the reactor’s volume, and 𝑛𝑅 is the total 
number of moles in the reactor.
The mass balance equations for the system under consideration, 
where the reaction
O+3M ←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←→G+3B (16)
takes place, are composed of four equations. The dynamics of the sys-
tem can be described by the following equation for temperature (energy 
balance):
𝑑𝑇𝑅
𝑑𝑡 =
𝑁𝑚𝐶𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑙,𝑚(𝑇𝑚 − 𝑇𝑅)+ 𝑁𝑜𝐶𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑙,𝑜(𝑇𝑜 − 𝑇𝑅)+ 𝑟𝑖𝑉𝑅
𝑛𝑅𝐶𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑙,𝑅
, (17)
where 𝑇𝑅, 𝑇𝑚, and 𝑇𝑜 denote the temperatures of the reactor, methanol 
stream, and oil stream, respectively. 𝐶𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑙,𝑚, 𝐶𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑙,𝑜, and 𝐶𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑙,𝑅 rep-
resent the molar heat capacities of the methanol stream, the oil stream, 
=== PAGE 7 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
7
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 11. a)RMSEofallthemodelsinextrapolation;b)BiodieselfractionandbestmodelspredictionsinOODtest(extrapolation).
and the reactor, respectively. The reaction rate vector, denoted by 𝐫, is 
deﬁned as
𝐫 =[− 𝑟,−3𝑟,𝑟, 3𝑟], (18)
where 𝑟is the reaction rate, a pseudo-parameter to be estimated from 
data.
4. Results
This section presents the results obtained from the models trained 
on diﬀerent application scenarios. The results will be presented in two 
stages, one regarding an extrapolation scenario (Stage I) and the other 
a transfer learning scenario (Stage II). More speciﬁcally, in Stage I we 
demonstrate the process of training and validating the models and eval-
uate their ability to extrapolate to new operating conditions. In Stage 
II, we utilize one week of process measurements data to perform trans-
fer learning using a hybrid modeling approach based on the best model 
from Stage I. We then compare this approach with a data-driven model 
trained using the new week’s data.
4.1. Stage I: extrapolation
During Stage I of the modeling process, it is postulated that the avail-
ability of data concerning a speciﬁc set of operating conditions or prod-
uct grades enables the development of data-driven models. Additionally, 
it is assumed that the underlying process is reasonably understood at 
an engineering level and thus can be expressed in mathematical terms. 
Conservation laws governing mass and energy balances are typically 
utilized to generate these models in the CPI domain, provided that suf-
ﬁcient knowledge is available.
The choice of the hybrid architecture is a critical decision to make 
when developing a hybrid modeling approach. If the ﬁrst-principles 
model has a high structural mismatch with the real process, the par-
allel cooperative and knowledge augmented hybrid architectures are 
often a good choice. This kind of structure allows engineers to use lin-
ear and static mass and energy balances even in nonlinear and dynamic 
systems, because the data-driven model will, in principle, account for 
those eﬀects and accommodate them in the hybrid model. The main 
disadvantage of the parallel cooperative architecture is the lack of ex-
trapolation properties when compared to the serial structure. Therefore, 
when the goal is to extrapolate to a new set of process conditions, the 
serial hybrid architecture, as well as the knowledge augmented hybrid 
architecture are expected to be more accurate and robust.
A concise summary of the extrapolation performance of the models 
is displayed in Fig.11a. The most eﬀective model for extrapolation is the 
knowledge augmented hybrid model utilizing the MLP, which demon-
strated only 8.6% of the RMSE presented by the ﬁrst-principles model 
and 33% of the RMSE of the best data-driven model. In Fig.11, we illus-
trated the measured KPI, the ﬁrst-principles model, the best data-driven 
model, and the most eﬀective hybrid model. The hybrid model tracks 
the measured KPI almost perfectly, with the exception of the ﬁnal peak 
value where it overestimates the measured KPI. Next, we present more 
details for the more relevant models.
4.1.1. First-principles model
Equations (15)-(18)provide  a sound characterization of the process 
described in Section 3.1 and illustrated in Fig. 9. The measured KPI is 
the biodiesel fraction in the output stream of the reactor. Assuming an 
ideal mixing scenario in the CSTR, the diesel fraction is equivalent to 
𝑥𝐵 in the ﬁrst-principles model introduced in Section3.2. Nonetheless, 
to fully deﬁne the model, the reaction rate 𝑟must be identiﬁed.
Given the abundance of data available and the single degree of free-
dom for model ﬁtting, parameter identiﬁcation is a relatively straight-
forward task. The reaction rate is estimated by minimizing the squared 
error between the measured biodiesel fraction and the corresponding 
predicted value using the GEKKO optimization suite (Beal et al., 2018). 
The identiﬁed value of 𝑟is 0.0479mol ⋅m−1. The resulting model and the 
training region are depicted in Fig. S.1a, where the model exhibits a root 
mean squared error (RMSE) of 0.015 and a coeﬃcient of determination 
(R2) of 0.44. When it comes to the performance of the ﬁrst-principles 
model over unseen conditions, the test RMSE and R2 are 0.011 and 
−1.476, respectively. On extrapolation, the goal of Stage I, RMSE = 
0.035 and R2= 0.388. The results are shown in Figs. S.1b and S.1c. The 
high RMSE observed in the ﬁrst-principles model suggests a fundamen-
tal discrepancy. This mismatch primarily stems from the simpler kinetic 
description adopted in the model, as delineated in Section3.2. In light 
of these observations, practitioners are usually presented with two op-
tions: one avenue is the reﬁnement of the existing ﬁrst-principles model 
to improve the level of fundamental mechanistic understanding of the 
system and its kinetics; alternatively, as explored in our study, one may 
opt to leverage existing data through hybrid modeling.
4.1.2. Data-driven models
The training of the data-driven models involves the use of six predic-
tor variables: reactor temperature (𝑇𝑅), oil feed mass ﬂow rate (𝐹𝑜𝑖𝑙), 
oil ﬁlter pressure drop (Δ𝑃), methanol feed mass ﬂow rate (𝐹𝑚), oil 
temperature (𝑇𝑜𝑖𝑙), and methanol stream temperature (𝑇𝑚). The mod-
els were developed to predict the biodiesel molar fraction (𝑥𝑏𝑖𝑜 or KPI), 
which served as the designated target variable. The models’ hyperpa-
rameters were identiﬁed using 10-fold cross-validation by minimizing 
the cross-validated RMSE between the predicted and measured KPI. The 
scikit-learn Python software library (Pedregosa et al., 2011) was em-
ployed for this task.
After the training stage, the models’ performance was evaluated on 
three distinct datasets: the training dataset, the in-domain (ID) test 
=== PAGE 8 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
8
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Table 1
Model performance of every data-driven model in the three datasets.
R2 RMSE
LASSO PLS RFR MLP LASSO PLS RFR MLP
Train 0.980 0.986 0.998 0.986 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.002
ID Test 0.922 0.902 0.220 0.907 0.002 0.002 0.006 0.002
OOD Test 0.893 0.960 -0.369 0.937 0.015 0.009 0.053 0.011
Table 2
Model performance of every serial hybrid model in the three datasets.
R2 RMSE
LASSO PLS RFR MLP LASSO PLS RFR MLP
Train 0.829 0.997 0.996 0.950 0.008 0.001 0.001 0.005
ID Test 0.050 0.830 0.077 -1.456 0.007 0.003 0.006 0.012
OOD Test 0.822 0.964 0.846 0.959 0.019 0.009 0.018 0.009
dataset, and the out-of-domain (OOD) test dataset (see Fig. S.2). The 
evaluation of the models’ performance on the training dataset assesses 
their ability to replicate previously observed data (i.e., the ﬁtting abil-
ity). In the ID test, we varied process conditions, while ensuring that the 
KPI remained within the limits of the training dataset. The OOD test, on 
the other hand, is representative of an extrapolation situation, which is 
the main focus of this study. The performance results are presented in 
Table1. The PLS model was found to be the most eﬀective data-driven 
model for extrapolation, although LASSO and MLP also exhibited fa-
vorable predictive capabilities. PLS’ superiority over the other models 
implies that the association between predictors and target is mostly lin-
ear, in addition to the fact that the predictor’s variables might exhibit 
some degree of collinearity. It should be noted that while the random 
forest regression (RFR) model was the most accurate for the training 
dataset, it performed poorly under extrapolation.
4.1.3. Explicit serial hybrid models
In the serial hybrid architecture applied to an extrapolation sce-
nario, the data-driven models PLS and MLP have demonstrated superior 
accuracy. The LASSO method also exhibited acceptable performance. 
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the utilization of RFR as the data-
driven submodel has yielded favorable performance metrics. This can be 
attributed to the fact that the predictive capability arises primarily from 
the ﬁrst-principles model, and the data-driven component is speciﬁcally 
concerned with predicting the reaction rate as an input to the former 
model. Thus, the serial hybrid model is very well suited for cases where 
there is a high level of conﬁdence in the ﬁrst-principles model, except 
on a well-deﬁned subsystem that can be supplied through a properly 
chosen machine learning model. The results are summarized in Fig. S.5, 
while the performance metrics are provided in Table2.
It is important to note that identifying a serial hybrid model ex-
plicitly confers a signiﬁcant advantage when compared to the implicit 
(simultaneous) alternative. By initially computing the reaction rates, the 
practitioner is encouraged to visualize these reaction rates. This, in turn, 
enhances the conﬁdence in the serial hybrid model, as it indicates that 
the data-driven model is not merely predicting a parameter that yields 
good prediction performance, but rather, a parameter that is consistent 
with engineering knowledge. Moreover, it is possible to plot the reac-
tion rates alongside the relevant process variables, thereby potentially 
revealing previously unknown insights into the operation of the pro-
cess and its eﬀect on critical parameters. In the present case study, the 
reaction rates were plotted as functions of the methanol feed ﬂow, oil 
feed ﬂow, reactor temperature, and the interaction between the reactor 
temperature and oil feed ﬂow (refer to Fig. 12). In Fig. 12a, it can be 
observed that the methanol feed ﬂow has a positive correlation with the 
reaction rate for each of the depicted operation levels. Additionally, ex-
amining Fig.12b reveals that these levels are obtained from the oil feed 
ﬂow, which exhibits a strong positive eﬀect on the reaction rates. As ex-
pected from engineering knowledge, the reactor temperature, which is 
related to the reaction rate (by the Arrhenius equation), is positively cor-
related to the reaction rate for the same level of oil ﬂow (see Fig.12c). 
Furthermore, the interaction of the two process variables with the reac-
tion rate is also positive, as illustrated in Fig.12d.
4.1.4. Knowledge augmented hybrid models
As detailed in Section 2.3, knowledge augmented hybrid models 
comprise the training of a data-driven model on a dataset of process 
measurements that has been augmented with the states predicted by 
a ﬁrst-principles model. This model has been previously trained and 
applied, enabling access to its predictions that may extend beyond 
the original operation window. In our speciﬁc case study, the ﬁrst-
principles model generates 5 state variables, all located within the re-
actor: biodiesel molar fraction, methanol molar fraction, glycerin mo-
lar fraction, oil molar fraction, and reactor temperature. These 5 state 
variables are concatenated with the process measurements, and the re-
sulting augmented dataset is used to train the data-driven models. The 
training process of these models involves the minimization of the cross-
validated RMSE between the predicted and computed KPIs (10-fold 
cross-validation). The outcomes are presented in Fig. S.6, while the met-
rics that reﬂect the performance of the model can be found in Table3.
The knowledge augmented hybrid model featuring MLP as the data-
driven model was found to be the best performing model for extrapo-
lation, but LASSO and PLS also presented very good predictive capa-
bilities. In this architecture, RFR showed a bad performance, possibly 
because it overﬁtted the training data.
4.2. Stage II: transfer learning
In Stage II, the process is assumed to have moved its operation win-
dow from the initial mode, A, to a new set of conditions, B, for a period 
of time. This period of time is still short and insuﬃcient for generat-
ing enough data to establish a new reliable model. For the purposes of 
this study, a week’s worth of data on the new conditions was consid-
ered to be available. As explained in Section3, the OOD test comprises 
four sets of diﬀerent conditions, thereby allowing Stage II to be tested 
on diverse datasets. It should be noted that this type of analysis can 
only be performed using a process simulator, as in reality, a chemical 
process would only encounter a single set of new conditions at a time. 
Fig. 13 displays the new conditions, alongside with the predictions of 
the ﬁrst-principles model, the best purely data-driven model (PLS), and 
the best hybrid model (knowledge augmented hybrid architecture with 
MLP as the data-driven submodel). Notably, all the models were trained 
exclusively on condition A, which constitutes the training dataset. As ob-
served, model predictions frequently exhibit bias, which may result from 
parametric or structural mismatch. This mismatch is more pronounced 
=== PAGE 9 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
9
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 12. Instantaneous reaction rates as a function of a) the methanol feed ﬂow; b) the oil feed ﬂow; c) the reactor temperature; d) and the interaction of the reactor 
temperature with the oil feed ﬂow.
Table 3
Model performance of every knowledge augmented hybrid model in the three datasets.
R2 RMSE
LASSO PLS RFR MLP LASSO PLS RFR MLP
Train 0.992 0.997 0.999 0.996 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001
ID Test 0.829 0.815 0.301 0.868 0.003 0.003 0.006 0.002
OOD Test 0.990 0.950 -0.227 0.995 0.005 0.010 0.050 0.003
in the ﬁrst-principles model, whereas the hybrid model displays less oﬀ-
set.
In order to mitigate model mismatch, we have employed a hybridiza-
tion approach, where we utilize the previously trained hybrid model 
(referred to as the source model) to generate a target model. As de-
scribed in Section 2.4, the most suitable architectures for this purpose 
are the knowledge augmented hybrid (TL-KAH) and the parallel co-
operative (TL-PH). In the former architecture, the prediction from the 
source model is incorporated as a variable into the process measure-
ments available. This augmented dataset is then used to correct the 
source prediction, thereby aligning it with the target conditions. To 
make the prediction, we employ the PLS model, as it was found to be the 
best data-driven model in several occasions in the previous subsection 
(Stage I). For the TL-PH architecture, we build a PLS model to predict 
the error between the source model and the target measurement, thus 
correcting the initial predictions. As benchmarks for these models, we 
compare them against the source model without any changes and a PLS 
model trained using the newly available week of data. The resulting RM-
SEs are presented in Fig.14a and the proﬁles are depicted in Fig.14b.
The results obtained through the application of hybrid modeling for 
model transfer were found to be encouraging. The transfer learning 
models outperformed the source model (KAH_MLP) in Test scenarios 
1, 3, and 4. However, in Test scenario 2, the source model was found 
to be slightly better. The reason for this can be attributed to the fact 
that the source model already had a low RMSE and the addition of 
model complexity via model transfer only led to an increase in variance, 
thereby degrading its performance. When comparing the performance 
of the hybrid models with that of PLS, it was observed that in the worst-
case scenario (Test 4), TL-PH matched the performance of PLS. In the 
other scenarios, model transfer yielded signiﬁcantly better results, thus 
demonstrating that incorporating available information from previous 
process conditions added value to the model. Additionally, in three out 
of four scenarios, the knowledge augmented hybrid architecture out-
performed the parallel cooperative architecture. In summary, the use of 
hybrid modeling techniques for transfer learning was found to be eﬀec-
tive, provided that the source model actually needs to be transferred. If 
the source model extrapolates well, it may be advisable to leave it as it 
is and monitor its performance.
5. Conclusions
We demonstrated the eﬀectiveness of hybrid modeling as a tool for 
industry practitioners to address evolving process conditions and mar-
ket demands by integrating knowledge and data. While the utilization 
of this technology is still limited due to the scarcity of well-deﬁned in-
structions and the perceived steep learning curve for training hybrid 
=== PAGE 10 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
10
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
Fig. 13. Implementationofnewoperatingconditions.
Fig. 14. a)RMSEoftransferredmodelsandbenchmarks;b)Biodieselfractionandmodelspredictions.
models, we believe the advantages of combining ﬁrst-principles models 
with machine learning methods are solid and go beyond the increased 
interpretability when compared to data-driven models, as demonstrated 
in this article.
The hybrid modeling methodology was applied to a simulated case 
study of biodiesel production operated under diﬀerent conditions that 
induce changes in biodiesel concentration (Fernandes et al., 2019). The 
performance of diﬀerent modeling approaches, including hybrid mod-
eling, pure physics-based models, and pure data-driven models, was 
assessed in terms of their ability to accurately predict process behav-
ior and support extrapolation and transfer learning. The results showed 
that hybrid modeling consistently outperformed the other approaches, 
with serial hybrid approaches being preferred for the extrapolation task. 
Hybrid modeling also required fewer samples than the other bench-
marks for the transfer learning task. These ﬁndings suggest that hybrid 
modeling is a useful approach for supporting extrapolation and trans-
fer learning in the context of managing process changes in the Chemical 
Processing Industries.
The choice of the hybrid architecture is a critical decision in de-
veloping a hybrid modeling approach. When the ﬁrst-principles model 
has a high structural mismatch with the real process, parallel coop-
erative and knowledge augmented hybrid architectures are often the 
best choices. This structure enables engineers to use linear and static 
mass and energy balances even in nonlinear and dynamic systems, with 
the data-driven model accounting for those eﬀects and accommodating 
them in the hybrid model. The disadvantage of the parallel cooperative 
architecture is its lack of extrapolation properties compared to the serial 
structure. Thus, the serial hybrid architecture, as well as the knowledge 
augmented hybrid architecture, are preferred when extrapolation to a 
new set of process conditions is the goal. In the case study explored in 
this article, the most eﬀective model for extrapolation is the knowledge 
augmented hybrid model utilizing the MLP, which demonstrated only 
8.6% of the RMSE presented by the ﬁrst-principles model and 33% of the 
RMSE of the best data-driven model. The hybrid model accurately tracks 
the measured KPI, with the exception of the ﬁnal peak value where it 
overestimates.
Moreover, the research details the application of transfer learning 
in conjunction with hybrid modeling, showcasing the adaptation of an 
existing model to novel process conditions through the training of an ad-
ditional hybrid layer with a minimal dataset. The use of hybrid modeling 
techniques for transfer learning was found to be eﬀective, provided that 
the source model actually needs to be transferred. Transfer learning is 
recommended when model performance in the new region experiences 
a signiﬁcant decline in accuracy.
In the future, we envision developing a systematic framework for 
developing hybrid models under the principles of Information Quality 
(InfoQ) (Reis and Kenett, 2018). The aim is to link the quality of the 
available data, goal deﬁnition, and engineering knowledge about a pro-
cess, to produce the hybrid architecture that generates the highest level 
of information quality.
=== PAGE 11 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
11
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Joel Sansana:Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, In-
vestigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Ricardo 
Rendall: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Conceptualization.
Ivan Castillo: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Resources. Leo 
Chiang: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Marco S.  Reis: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, 
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Fundação para a Ciên-
cia e Tecnologia, I.P., through the projects https://doi .org /10 .54499 /
UIDB /00102 /2020and https://doi .org /10 .54499 /UIDP /00102 /2020.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at 
https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .ces .2024 .120568.
References
Andersson, M., 2009. A comparison of nine PLS1 algorithms. J. Chemom. 23 (10), 
518–529. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /cem .1248.
Azarpour, A., Borhani, T.N.G., Wan Alwi, S.R., Manan, Z.A., Abdul Mutalib, M.I., 2017. 
A generic hybrid model development for process analysis of industrial ﬁxed-bed cat-
alytic reactors. Chem. Eng. Res. Des.117,  149–167. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cherd .
2016 .10 .024.
Beal, L.D.R., Hill, D.C., Martin, R.A., Hedengren, J.D., 2018. GEKKO optimization suite. 
Processes6  (8), 106. https://doi .org /10 .3390 /pr6080106.
Bishop, C., 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Information Science and 
Statistics. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Brásio, A.S.R., Romanenko, A., Fernandes, N.C.P., Santos, L.O., 2016. First principle mod-
eling and predictive control of a continuous biodiesel plant. J. Process Control 47, 
11–21. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jprocont .2016 .09 .003.
Chen, Y., Ierapetritou, M., 2020. A framework of hybrid model development with iden-
tiﬁcation of plant-model mismatch. AIChE J., e16996. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /aic .
16996.
de Calle-Etxabe, K.L., Ruiz-Carcel, C., Starr, A., Ferreiro, S., Arnaiz, A., Gomez-Omella, M., 
Sierra, B., 2020. Hybrid modelling for linear actuator diagnosis in absence of faulty 
data records. Comput. Ind.123,  103339.
de Jong, S., 1993. SIMPLS: an alternative approach to partial least squares regression. 
Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst.18  (3), 251–263. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /0169 -7439(93 )
85002 -x.
Dietterich, T.G., 2000. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In: Multiple Classiﬁer Sys-
tems. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.1–15.
Facco, P., Tomba, E., Bezzo, F., García-Muñoz, S., Barolo, M., 2012. Transfer of process 
monitoring models between diﬀerent plants using latent variable techniques. Ind. Eng. 
Chem. Res.51  (21), 7327–7339. https://doi .org /10 .1021 /ie202974u.
Farahani, H.S., Fatehi, A., Nadali, A., Shoorehdeli, M.A., 2021. Domain adversarial neu-
ral network regression to design transferable soft sensor in a power plant. Comput. 
Ind.132,  103489.
Fernandes, N., Romanenko, A., Reis, M.S., 2019. Mechanistic modeling and simulation 
for process data generation. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. https://doi .org /10 .1021 /acs .iecr .
9b01752.
Geladi, P., 1988. Notes on the history and nature of partial least squares (PLS) modelling. 
J. Chemom.2  (4), 231–246. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /cem .1180020403.
Gurden, S.P., Westerhuis, J.A., Bijlsma, S., Smilde, A.K., 2001. Modelling of spectro-
scopic batch process data using grey models to incorporate external information. J. 
Chemom.15  (2), 101–121. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /1099 -128x(200102 )15 :2<101 ::
aid -cem602 >3 .0 .co ;2 -v.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J., 2016. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data 
Mining, Inference, and Prediction, 2nd edition. Springer, New York, NY.
Johansen, T.A., Foss, B.A., 1992. Representing and learning unmodeled dynamics with 
neural network memories. In: 1992 American Control Conference, pp.3037–3043.
Kim, M., Lim, C., Hsuan, J., 2023. From technology enablers to circular economy: data-
driven understanding of the overview of servitization and product–service systems in 
industry 4.0. Comput. Ind.148,  103908.
Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2017. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. arXiv :1412 .6980. 
https://doi .org /10 .48550 /arXiv .1412 .6980, Jan. 2017.
Kourti, T., MacGregor, J., 1995. Process analysis, monitoring and diagnosis, using multi-
variate projection methods. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst.28,  3–21. https://doi .org /10 .
1016 /0169 -7439(95 )80036 -9.
Kramer, M.A., Thompson, M.L., Bhagat, P.M., 1992. Embedding theoretical models in 
neural networks. In: 1992 American Control Conference, pp.475–479.
Kresta, J.V., Macgregor, J.F., Marlin, T.E., 1991. Multivariate statistical monitoring of 
process operating performance. Can. J. Chem. Eng. 69, 35–47. https://doi .org /10 .
1258 /phleb .2011 .010101.
Liew, W.T., Adhitya, A., Srinivasan, R., 2014. Sustainability trends in the process indus-
tries: a text mining-based analysis. Comput. Ind.65  (3), 393–400. https://doi .org /10 .
1016 /j .compind .2014 .01 .004.
Maas, A.L., Hannun, A.Y., Ng, A.Y., 2013. Rectiﬁer nonlinearities improve neural network 
acoustic models. In: ICML, vol.30,  p.3.
MacGregor, J.F., Kourti, T., 1995. Statistical process control of multivariate processes. 
Control Eng. Pract.3  (3), 403–414. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /0967 -0661(95 )00014 -l.
MacGregor, J.F., Jaeckle, C., Kiparissides, C., Koutoudi, M., 1994. Process monitoring and 
diagnosis by multiblock PLS methods. AIChE J.40  (5), 826–838. https://doi .org /10 .
1002 /aic .690400509.
Molinaro, M., Orzes, G., 2022. From forest to ﬁnished products: the contribution of indus-
try 4.0 technologies to the wood sector. Comput. Ind.138,  103637.
Oliveira, R., 1998. Supervision, control and optimization of biotechnological processes 
based on hybrid models. Ph.D. thesis, Ph.D. Dissertation. Martin-Luther Universität, 
Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.
Oliveira, R., 2004. Combining ﬁrst principles modelling and artiﬁcial neural networks: a 
general framework. Comput. Chem. Eng.28  (5), 755–766. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /
j .compchemeng .2004 .02 .014.
Pan, S.J., Yang, Q., 2010. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.22  
(10), 1345–1359. https://doi .org /10 .1109 /tkde .2009 .191.
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, 
M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, 
D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duchesnay, E., 2011. Scikit-learn: machine learning in 
Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res.12,  2825–2830.
Psichogios, D.C., Ungar, L.H., 1992. A hybrid neural network-ﬁrst principles approach 
to process modeling. AIChE J. 38 (10), 1499–1511. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /aic .
690381003.
Quiñones-Grueiro, M., Prieto-Moreno, A., Verde, C., Llanes-Santiago, O., 2019. Data-
driven monitoring of multimode continuous processes: a review. Chemom. Intell. Lab. 
Syst.189,  56–71. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .chemolab .2019 .03 .012.
Reis, M.S., Gins, G., 2017. Industrial process monitoring in the big data/industry 4.0 Era: 
from detection, to diagnosis, to prognosis. Processes 5 (3), 35. https://doi .org /10 .
3390 /pr5030035.
Reis, M.S., Kenett, R., 2018. Assessing the value of information of data-centric activities 
in the chemical processing Industry 4.0. AIChE J. 64 (11), 3868–3881. https://doi .
org /10 .1002 /aic .16203.
Reis, M.S., Saraiva, P.M., 2019. Data-centric process systems engineering for the chemical 
Industry 4.0. In: Systems Engineering in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd., pp.137–159.  Ch. 6.
Rendall, R., Reis, M.S., 2018. Which regression method to use? Making informed deci-
sions in “data-rich/knowledge poor” scenarios – the predictive analytics comparison 
framework (PAC). Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst.181,  52–63. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
chemolab .2018 .08 .004.
Rendall, R., Castillo, I., Schmidt, A., Chin, S.-T., Chiang, L.H., Reis, M., 2019. Wide spec-
trum feature selection (WiSe) for regression model building. Comput. Chem. Eng.121,  
99–110. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .compchemeng .2018 .10 .005.
Sansana, J., Joswiak, M.N., Castillo, I., Wang, Z., Rendall, R., Chiang, L.H., Reis, M.S., 
2021. Recent trends on hybrid modeling for Industry 4.0. Comput. Chem. Eng.151,  
107365. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .compchemeng .2021 .107365.
Schmidhuber, J., 2015. Deep learning in neural networks: an overview. Neural Netw.61,  
85–117. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .neunet .2014 .09 .003.
Schubert, J., Simutis, R., Dors, M., Havlík, I., Lübbert, A., 1994. Hybrid modelling of 
yeast production processes – combination of a priori knowledge on diﬀerent levels 
of sophistication. Chem. Eng. Technol.17  (1), 10–20. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /ceat .
270170103.
Su, H.-T., Bhat, N., Minderman, P., McAvoy, T., 1992. Integrating neural networks with 
ﬁrst principles models for dynamic modeling. In: Dynamics and Control of Chemical 
Reactors, Distillation Columns and Batch Processes. Elsevier, pp.327–332.
Thompson, M.L., Kramer, M.A., 1994. Modeling chemical processes using prior knowl-
edge and neural networks. AIChE J.40  (8), 1328–1340. https://doi .org /10 .1002 /aic .
690400806.
Tibshirani, R., 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc. B58  
(1), 267–288. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .2517 -6161 .1996 .tb02080 .x.
Tomba, E., Barolo, M., García-Muñoz, S., 2012. General framework for latent variable 
model inversion for the design and manufacturing of new products. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
Res.51  (39), 12886–12900. https://doi .org /10 .1021 /ie301214c.
=== PAGE 12 ===
Chemical Engineering Science 300 (2024) 120568
12
J. Sansana, R. Rendall, I. Castillo et al.
von Rueden, L., Mayer, S., Beckh, K., Georgiev, B., Giesselbach, S., Heese, R., Kirsch, 
B., Pfrommer, J., Pick, A., Ramamurthy, R., Walczak, M., Garcke, J., Bauckhage, C., 
Schuecker, J., 2023. Informed machine learning – a taxonomy and survey of inte-
grating prior knowledge into learning systems. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.35  (1), 
614–633. https://doi .org /10 .1109 /TKDE .2021 .3079836.
von Stosch, M., Oliveira, R., Peres, J., de Azevedo, S. Feyo, 2014. Hybrid semi-parametric 
modeling in process systems engineering: past, present and future. Comput. Chem. 
Eng.60,  86–101. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .compchemeng .2013 .08 .008.
Wold, H., 1975. Soft modelling by latent variables: the non-linear iterative partial least 
squares (NIPALS) approach. J. Appl. Probab. 12 (S1), 117–142. https://doi .org /10 .
1017 /s0021900200047604.
Wold, S., Sjöström, M., Eriksson, L., 2001. PLS-regression: a basic tool of chemometrics. 
Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst.58  (2), 109–130. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /s0169 -7439(01 )
00155 -1.
Zhuang, Y., Liu, Y., Ahmed, A., Zhong, Z., del Rio Chanona, E.A., Hale, C.P., Mercangöz, 
M., 2022. A hybrid data-driven and mechanistic model soft sensor for estimating co2 
concentrations for a carbon capture pilot plant. Comput. Ind.143,  103747.